index



✅ What is an Index in MySQL?
  "An index is a special data structure in MySQL that makes searching in the database faster."

Index ek special data structure hoti hai jo database me search ko fast banati hai.

"Just like the index at the beginning of a book tells you which topic is on which page, a MySQL index helps the database quickly locate the rows that match a query, without scanning the entire table."'


✅"Just like the index at the beginning of a book tells you which topic is on which page, a MySQL index helps the database find data faster without  
    checking every row."



"Jaise book ke starting me index hota hai jo batata hai kaunsa topic kis page par hai, waise hi MySQL me index hota hai jo fast searching me help karta hai by pointing directly to the location of data."



🔹 Without Index:

"If there is no index, MySQL checks every row in the table to find the data — this takes more time." it is called Full table scan. 

🔹 With Index

"If we use an index, MySQL can directly find the required row using the index — this is called an Index Lookup (for exact match) or an Index Range Scan (for range-based queries), depending on the type of query."



 What is an Index Lookup in MySQL?
🔹 Simple Definition:
Index Lookup (also called Index Seek) is when MySQL uses an index to directly find a specific row in the table without scanning all rows.



Toh MySQL ko poori table ko scan karna padega (isko bolte hain Full Table Scan) – slow hoga.

But agar name par index bana diya, toh MySQL directly us name pe jump karega — very fast!

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

✅ How Index Works Internally?
When we create an index on a column (for example: name), MySQL internally uses a data structure called a B-Tree (Balanced Tree).
This B-Tree is made up of blocks (called pages) of fixed size, usually 16KB each.

OR

"An index internally uses a B+Tree data structure. This B+Tree is composed of fixed-size blocks, called pages, which are usually 16KB each in InnoDB."




✅ What is a B-Tree?
A B-Tree (Balanced Tree) is a special data structure that stores data in sorted order and allows for fast searching, insertion, and deletion — especially in disk-based systems like MySQL. O(log n) time


✅ How does a B-Tree work internally?

 “B-Tree stores sorted data in blocks. It compares keys, goes left or right, and splits nodes if full. This keeps the tree balanced and makes search fast. MySQL uses B-Tree for indexing.”


OR

A B-Tree is a self-balancing tree that stores data in sorted order and allows fast search, insert, and delete operations.

Each node contains multiple sorted keys

Smaller values go to the left, larger values go to the right

When a node is full, it splits, and the middle key moves up

The tree stays balanced, so search happens in O(log n) time

In MySQL, each node is stored as a 16KB block that holds keys and pointers




 Q: Why do we use an index in MySQL?
✅ Answer:
We use an index in MySQL to improve the performance of SELECT queries.



 When should we use an index? Can you give an example?
✅ Answer:
Yes sir/ma’am.
We should use an index when the table has a large amount of data and we frequently run search or filter queries on specific columns.

For example:

If a table has 10,000+ rows, and we are running this query often:

SELECT * FROM employees WHERE name = 'John';
Without an index on the name column, MySQL will do a Full Table Scan — checking all 10,000 rows one by one.

But if we create an index on name, MySQL can use a B-Tree index to quickly jump to 'John', which is much faster.

That’s why indexing is important for performance in large datasets.

🔁 Short version (if less time in interview):
"When a table has lots of data — like 10,000+ rows — and we search using WHERE conditions on specific columns, we should use indexes to avoid full table scans and improve speed."


HOW TO CREATE INDEX

 Basic Syntax to Create an Index

CREATE INDEX index_name 
ON table_name(column_name);

---------------
example

CREATE TABLE employee (
    id INT PRIMARY KEY,
    name VARCHAR(100),
    email VARCHAR(100),
    department VARCHAR(100)
);

CREATE INDEX idx_email
ON employee (email);



------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



✅ Types of Index in MySQL (With Example)
Index Type	Description	                                     Example
PRIMARY KEY	Automatically creates a unique index.	              id
UNIQUE INDEX	Index with no duplicate values allowed.	               email
NORMAL INDEX (a.k.a. INDEX)	Speeds up read/search. Duplicates allowed.	name
FULLTEXT INDEX	For full-text search (used in text-heavy columns).	description
COMPOSITE INDEX	Index on multiple columns.	                          (department, salary)



where indexing exist 
CUP 

MySQL me data hard disk me store hota hai, aur:

✅ Hard disk se poora file read karna slow hota hai
✅ Isliye MySQL data ko 16KB ke "Block" (ya Page) me todta hai
✅ Ek block me kai rows ya keys hote hain


🔥 "MySQL index ek tree banata hai jo blocks me hota hai, aur har block me keys + pointer hote hain.
Jab hum data dhoondhte hain, to MySQL block se block jump karta hai jaise dictionary me page dhoondhte ho."


Jab index banate ho, to MySQL B-Tree index banata hai