                          MARKER INTERFACE


.A marker interface is an empty interface (without methods)or fields. it is used to mark as class for special behavior

why we use marker interface.
A marker interface is used to tell the JVM or frameworks that a class has special permission or behavior.

🔹 Example:
Serializable → tells JVM: "This object can be saved to a file or sent over network."

Serializable → tells JVM: "This object can be cloned."




A marker interface is an empty interface (no methods, no fields) used to mark a class. 

A marker interface helps the JVM or frameworks identify a class during execution (runtime) and apply special behavior.


How Does Java Identify a Marker Interface?
Java checks : if a class implements a marker interface using:

Java identifies a Marker Interface using two ways:

1. instanceof operator (simple check)
2. Reflection API (advanced check)



1. instanceof operator

Q. What is instanceof Operator?
A= instanceof is a built-in operator in Java that  
   checks whether an object belongs to a particular 
   class or interface.

  If the object is an instance of the specified class   
  or interface, it returns true; otherwise, it  
  returns false.


 Using instanceof with Marker Interface
Since a Marker Interface does not have any methods, Java uses the instanceof operator to check whether a class has implemented that interface or not.


2. What is Reflection API?
   Reflection API is an advanced feature in Java that allows us to retrieve  
   information about a class, its methods, and its interfaces at runtime.

   It is used to check whether a class has implemented an interface without using the   
   instanceof operator.



What is Serializable?
Serializable is a Marker Interface in Java, present in the java.io package.
It is used to convert an object into a "byte stream" so that:
✔ It can be saved to a file.
✔ It can be sent over a network.
✔ It can be stored in a database.

Since Serializable is a Marker Interface, it does not contain any methods. Its mere presence is enough to tell Java that the class can be serialized.

                             OR
Since Serializable is a Marker Interface, it does not contain any methods.
Just implementing it is enough for Java to know that the class can be serialized.


🔹 Why Use Serializable?
✔ To save data – If we need to store an object's state in a file.
✔ To send over a network – To transfer an object to another computer or server.
✔ To store in a database – If we need to save an object in a database.

What is a Byte Stream?
A byte stream is a sequence of bytes (8-bit data units) used for input and output (I/O) operations in Java. It allows data to be read or written as raw bytes, making it useful for handling binary data like images, audio, and serialized objects.

🔹 How Byte Stream Works in Java?
In Java, byte streams are handled using InputStream and OutputStream classes.

✔ InputStream – Reads data as bytes.
✔ OutputStream – Writes data as bytes.


🔹 Byte Stream in Serialization
In Serialization, objects are converted into a byte stream before being saved or transferred. Java uses ObjectOutputStream and ObjectInputStream for this process.



What is serializable 

🔷 1. Serializable kya hota hai?
➤ Serializable ek marker interface hai:

public interface Serializable {}
Isme koi method nahi hota.

Iska kaam hai: batana ki ye class ka object serialize hone layak hai.







